readme.md, before:

# quick-meetings

This branch identifies a SQL bug which is easy to miss while identifying overlapping meetings.

## Run the failing test

To run the problematic test:

```bash
mvn clean test -Dgroups=test-being-demoed
```

## Bug: SQL query to check overlaps is wrong

This test fails when the second meeting is overlapping with the first but only if the
second meeting **starts before** and **ends after** the first - note how the original
sample finds a larger time overlap but the shrunk example finds the smallest failing
case:

```
Shrunk Sample (130 steps)
-------------------------
  meeting1Start: 2025-01-01T10:00:01
  meeting1DurationMins: 1
  meeting2Start: 2025-01-01T10:00
  meeting2DurationMins: 2

Original Sample
---------------
  meeting1Start: 2025-01-01T20:09:29
  meeting1DurationMins: 6
  meeting2Start: 2025-01-01T19:55:33
  meeting2DurationMins: 49
```

## The query that was problematic

The following query has a bug (in the last AND clause) - it is quite hard to catch it at first
glance:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM
meetings existing_meeting JOIN user_meetings um ON existing_meeting.id = um.meeting_id
WHERE um.user_id IN (:userIds)
AND um.role_of_user IN ('OWNER', 'ACCEPTED')
AND (
  (existing_meeting.from_ts <= :from AND existing_meeting.to_ts >= :from)
  OR
  (existing_meeting.from_ts <= :to AND existing_meeting.to_ts >= :to)
)
```

The red meeting overlaps with the exsiting meeting but is missed by this query:
<img src="src/test/resources/overlaps.jpg" width="600">

### Fix

To fix this, use a different query (`./fix.sh`):

```
git revert --no-commit 7cb6fc9 && git reset HEAD
```

## Switching Between Branches

There are some scripts for easier switching between branches / running tests:

| Script            | Branch                                                                                                               | Testing Area                                                                   |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `./demo-1.sh`     | [demo-1-server-never-returns-5xx](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-1-server-never-returns-5xx)     | Presentation: APIs should always return JSON                                   |
| `./demo-2.sh`     | [demo-2-invalid-date-range](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-2-invalid-date-range)                 | Presentation: Valid date ranges should be accepted                             |
| `./demo-3.sh`     | [demo-3-meeting-creation-scenarios](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-3-meeting-creation-scenarios) | A meeting cannot be created if it overlaps with an existing meeting            |
| `./demo-4.sh`     | [demo-4-meeting-acceptations](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-4-meeting-acceptations)             | Interleaving multi-user actions should not allow overlapping meetings to exist |
| `./demo-5.sh`     | [demo-5-empty-meetings](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-5-empty-meetings)                         | No end-user action can cause a meeting to become empty with no attendees       |
| `./demo-reset.sh` | [main](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/)                                                                    | No failing test - All fixes implemented                                        |
| `./fix*.sh`       |                                                                                                                      | Scripts that fixes bugs in the individual branches                             |

Commit message:

Add a before and after clause

readme.md, after:

# quick-meetings

This branch identifies a SQL bug which is easy to miss while identifying overlapping meetings.

## Run the failing test

To run the problematic test:

```bash
mvn clean test -Dgroups=test-being-demoed
```

## Bug: SQL query to check overlaps is wrong

This test fails when the second meeting is overlapping with the first but only if the
second meeting **starts before** and **ends after** the first - note how the original
sample finds a larger time overlap but the shrunk example finds the smallest failing
case:

```
Shrunk Sample (130 steps)
-------------------------
  meeting1Start: 2025-01-01T10:00:01
  meeting1DurationMins: 1
  meeting2Start: 2025-01-01T10:00
  meeting2DurationMins: 2

Original Sample
---------------
  meeting1Start: 2025-01-01T20:09:29
  meeting1DurationMins: 6
  meeting2Start: 2025-01-01T19:55:33
  meeting2DurationMins: 49
```

## The query that was problematic

The following query has a bug (in the last AND clause) - it is quite hard to catch it at first
glance:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM
meetings existing_meeting JOIN user_meetings um ON existing_meeting.id = um.meeting_id
WHERE um.user_id IN (:userIds)
AND um.role_of_user IN ('OWNER', 'ACCEPTED')
AND (
  (existing_meeting.from_ts <= :from AND existing_meeting.to_ts >= :from)
  OR
  (existing_meeting.from_ts <= :to AND existing_meeting.to_ts >= :to)
)
```

The red meeting overlaps with the exsiting meeting but is missed by this query:
<img src="src/test/resources/overlaps.jpg" width="600">

### Fix

To fix this, use a different query (`./fix.sh`):

```
git revert --no-commit 7cb6fc9 && git reset HEAD
```

### Updated Query

Following is the fixed query clause - even after knowing the fix, the correct query is less
intuitive - and that highlights the problem of enumerating test cases: a subconscious bias of human
programmers to prefer the more understandable over the more correct solution.

| Original clause                                                                                                                                | Fixed clause                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (existing_meeting.from_ts <= :from AND existing_meeting.to_ts >= :from) OR (existing_meeting.from_ts <= :to AND existing_meeting.to_ts >= :to) | (existing_meeting.from_ts <= :to AND existing_meeting.to_ts >= :from) |

## Switching Between Branches

There are some scripts for easier switching between branches / running tests:

| Script            | Branch                                                                                                               | Testing Area                                                                   |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `./demo-1.sh`     | [demo-1-server-never-returns-5xx](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-1-server-never-returns-5xx)     | Presentation: APIs should always return JSON                                   |
| `./demo-2.sh`     | [demo-2-invalid-date-range](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-2-invalid-date-range)                 | Presentation: Valid date ranges should be accepted                             |
| `./demo-3.sh`     | [demo-3-meeting-creation-scenarios](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-3-meeting-creation-scenarios) | A meeting cannot be created if it overlaps with an existing meeting            |
| `./demo-4.sh`     | [demo-4-meeting-acceptations](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-4-meeting-acceptations)             | Interleaving multi-user actions should not allow overlapping meetings to exist |
| `./demo-5.sh`     | [demo-5-empty-meetings](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/tree/demo-5-empty-meetings)                         | No end-user action can cause a meeting to become empty with no attendees       |
| `./demo-reset.sh` | [main](https://github.com/mourjo/quick-meetings/)                                                                    | No failing test - All fixes implemented                                        |
| `./fix*.sh`       |                                                                                                                      | Scripts that fixes bugs in the individual branches                             |
